the United States says that three
members of its armed forces have been
killed and dozens more wounded in a
drone attack near a base on Jordan's
border with Syria us officials say that
the Drone struck near a Barracks at the
base in the rupan re region it is the
first time that a strike has killed
American soldiers in the area since the
start of the Israel Hamas War US
President Joe Biden blamed iran-backed
militants for the attack and has bowed
to respond Iran denies any
involvement resistance groups in the
region do not take orders from the
Islamic Republic of Iran with regard to
their decision making or
actions while Iran does not welcome the
development of conflict in the region it
does not interfere with the resistance
group's decisions on how to support the
Palestinian Nation or defend themselves
and their people against any aggression
or
occupation and for more on that let's
bring in Middle East analyst Daniel
gerla he joins us he's editor-in chief
of the magazine Zenith which focuses on
the Arab and the Islamic World welcome
to the program and thank you so much for
joining us I mean we just heard there
that statement from Iran seeming to try
to distance themselves from this strike
um I'd like to ask you financing aside
do you think that Tyron is strategically
involved in strikes like the one on US
troops in Jordan what did you make of
the
statement well I think uh Iran is
involved in structuring and motivating
this uh Alliance this plethora of
militias mostly Shia oriented militias
in the region however I think uh these
groups also work uh at their own behest
and have their own timetable and uh I
think that is also the the plausible
deniability for the Iranians is also
essential here so this is more it's a
financial is a logistic it's an
ideological support but um as we have
seen in the past I don't not think that
Iran is coordinating every individual
strike it's not in the Strategic
interest of the Iranians to do that um
and they see how that these groups and
these militias also operate
independently but actually contribute to
the overall uh deterrence of Iran in the
region however what happened now is um
the killing of three uh US service
members which uh probably did not go
according to plan because before these
militias made actually sure that they
would inflict harm and that they would
uh provoke the Americans but make sure
that they wouldn't cross a certain red
line and the killing of US servicemen is
certainly a red line that the Americans
need to respond and that's uh that puts
also Iran on the spot and now there are
reports that iran-backed fighters in
East Syria have started evacuating their
posts in anticipation of a US Counter
Strike do you expect Washington to
launch air strikes there what sort of us
response could be
anticipated well you know the the the
fighting the shadow war that is going on
between uh the United States and its
allies and these Iran back militias in
the region is very complex and it's
happening on M on on various fronts it
happens in Syria on the Syrian Jordanian
border specifically that triangle of
rubban between Iraq Syria and Jordan
happens in Iraq and in other places I've
just returned from Baghdad and last week
uh they while I was in Baghdad there was
a a US strike on a uh Shia militia group
southeast of Baghdad in the place called
Jor sakar which killed several uh
alleged militia men and uh I think this
attack could be seen as a response uh to
that us attack which itself was a
response to an attack on the an Assad
Air Base in uh in in in Iraq so this
conflict escalates on various fronts in
various countries and it's very
difficult for the respective governments
of these countries to stay out of it
they don't want to be drawn into this
certainly not Iraq certainly not Jordan
but we have seen a number of Border
incidents and it's so far it seemed like
most of the most of the fighting is
happening in Syria itself on Sy Syrian
territory but it can happen elsewhere
too as we see and it's interesting
because we've seen since hamas's Terror
attacks on October 7th and Israel's
response in Gaza the vast majority of
world leaders and diplomats have
stressed the importance of preventing a
wider Regional escalation as you've
highlighted
there would you say this has been a
failure are are mistakes being
made a lot of mistakes are being made
but um but the fact that you want to
prevent a major regional escalation uh
doesn't mean that that you would not act
uh in self-defense or in response to to
some of those attacks so the logic is on
the one hand all sides want to prevent a
major regional escalation on the other
hand they do Tit for Tat whenever
they're being attacked they want to
strike back and these like retribution
strikes uh
major harm can happen and this can lead
to another escalation so whereas many
parties in the region not all of them by
the way want to avoid a regional
escalation the regional escalation is
happening and this is unfortunately the
logic of deterrence and of Retribution
that we have been seeing for a long time
for America and Iran this can result in
a major problem because at one point uh
they would either have to engage in
really meaningful diplomatic
negotiations how to prevent this from
happening or uh we would see this being
taken to another level soon you
mentioned this multiple strikes and and
responses um and I'd like to know how
you see the strike now in Jordan does
this drone strike mean another front has
now opened up in the already volatile
mid Middle East or do you expect that
this um could potentially be a oneoff
that can be
contained no the the the front already
exists and not with regard to Jordan but
mainly with regard to Syria and to Iraq
where these militias operate uh in the
case of Iraq against the will will of
the government in the case of Syria with
a certain like consent and support of
the government uh but uh this place
where the strike happens is a
strategically very important place it's
in the Eastern Bia like this the
southern desert of Syria as I mentioned
before a triangle between Iraq Jordan
and Syria and the Americans had been
there initially to fight uh Islamic
State militants so-call dases from this
area and it's become some sort of a No
Man's Land because the Americans are
there and of course nobody should move
any closer to the base without taking
the RIS R of being attacked then you
have these groups that are saying
they're fighting American occupation of
Syrian territory um actually it's a no
man's land with many refugees people
that are being uh left alone with little
to no humanitarian support but nobody
wants to move out of this region either
so uh I don't think it's a new front I
think it's but it's an it's a
strategically important place that one
should U you know be careful to contain
some really important context there
Middle East expert Daniel gerlock thank
you so much for that analysis and
sharing your expert we appreciate
it thank
you